# Comparison of C & Java    

    

C is designed for systems programming in 1972 by Dennis Ritchie, but it is appropriate for wide variety of applications. Java is high-level programming language which was intended to let “write once run everywhere”. It was released in 1995, and originally developed by James Gosling. Java is an object-oriented programming language, whereas C does not have an object-oriented support, it is an imperative, procedural programming language. C++ is designed after C for the support of object-oriented programming. Java is based on C++, but it is portable, safer. In this way, it can be thought there is a chain relationship between Java, C, and C++. Both C and Java are high level languages, but C is closer to the machine language than Java.   

Imperative programming is a paradigm which focuses on describing how a program operates step by step, and every operation are coded to perform these steps. It derives procedural programming, which is based on procedures, subprograms, functions. C is procedural because, it depends on the procedures, routines, or subroutines. Problem is solved with calling functions procedurally; functions are the main option to manipulate data in C. There is no option to hide the data, still it is possible to program this type of options in C. Object oriented programming is based on the object which contains data, functions(methods). These objects are instances of classes. It has inheritance, polymorphism, encapsulation features. Main purpose of this paradigm is writing reusable, secured code using classes, and other OOP features. According to some sources it is considered that OOP is derived from imperative programming paradigm like procedural, but some says it is different from imperative, and declarative programming. Java is written with the purpose of creating pure object-oriented programming language which is derived from C++. All methods must be encapsulated in classes (even driver method) unlike C. There isn’t any option to create classes in C. All methods are called from instances of classes, and all classes are derived from Object class. C has “struct” type, but it is not possible to define functions inside structs directly. All Java methods are virtual except static methods. Generally, programs are written in C with more direct approach; there is main function, then problems solved with calling other functions inside main function procedurally. On the other hand, in Java there is a driver class which performs your program like C, but it has an option to create reusable fragments, concepts. This causes some tradeoffs, advantages which are explained in detail on other paragraphs. Java is pure object-oriented, but it is also procedural because, with static methods programs also can be written procedurally. It is possible to write programs without using OOP concepts.    

C and Java have different compilation processes, C programs compiles with 4 steps which are preprocessing, compiling, assembling, linking. In preprocessing, comments, macros, inclusions are arranged. In compilation step, intermediate code is converted to assembly code. After that, assembler converts assembly code to machine language. Then with linker, inclusion of library files is done, executable file is created. In Java there are 2 steps, compilation, and execution. In compilation step Java code is converted to a different code that specialized as Java byte code. Execution step happens in Java Virtual Machine. Compilation step creates .class files which holds byte code. Class files are loaded with class loader, then byte code is interpreted to machine code using Just in Time compiler during execution step. Therefore, it can be said that Java is compiled, and interpreted language, but C is only compiled language. Because in Java as explained, there is a compilation step that creates Java byte code, but it requires a virtual machine to interpret byte code to machine code unlike C. In C, after compilation step code runs directly in execution step, there are not any interpretation process. These differences cause some results which are explained later in this essay.    

C and Java have similar syntaxes with some differences. C tokens are classified as keywords, identifiers, strings, constants, operators, and special symbols (punctuations, separators). Java tokens are same except strings. Java has much more keywords than C because Java is higher level language, and it has object-oriented support. Some of the examples of keywords that Java has C does not are class, implements, extends, public, private, protected, instanceof, abstract, try, catch, etc... In both language keywords cannot be identifiers. It has similar rules, identifiers must contain only alphanumeric characters, but in Java identifiers can start with $ sign. Each language is case sensitive. Additionally, Java class names should start with upper case letters, in C structs this is not a case, and file names must be same with that class name in Java. C strings are special character arrays which are end with ‘/0’ character. In Java this is not like that, there is String class in Java, and it is an abstract data type. Both languages strings represented with double quotations (“”) when they are defined. Constants/literals are a little bit different while defining, in Java they are defined with “final” keyword, in C they can be defined with using “const” or “#define”. “#define” is a preprocessor. Java literals are, integer, floating point, character, string, boolean and null. C literals are same except boolean, and null. C’s NULL and Java’s null are different. NULL means 0. Java’s null is not 0 it cannot be casted to an integer, it is literal. C has no boolean data type. True is 1, false is 0 in C, but in Java it is another data type not integers. Both languages operators are quite similar. They are grouped as arithmetic, assignment, relational, logical, and bitwise operators. They all work as the same except Java has “&” operator which is differs from C. “&&” operator in both language means “logical and”. They have short circuit evaluation feature. In Java there is “&” operator which checks both side of an and operator, and arrow (->) operator works different in both languages. In Java it is used for lambda expressions, on the other hand in C it indicates pointing an element of struct variables member. Punctuations in both languages are similar also, C has “#” for preprocessors, and “*” for pointers. Java does not have these, but Java has “@” symbol for annotations. They both have square brackets, curly braces, parentheses, assignment operator, semicolon, and period(.). In both programming language, code blocks are inside of curly braces, and each statement ends with semicolon. Therefore, their syntaxes are quite similar with each other except the differences that are indicated. Comments are inside of “/* */” blocks in both languages. Java has support of “//” line commenting, later C versions also have this support. Whitespaces are ignored for both programming languages. Method names must start with lowercase letter in Java, but in C functions this is not the case. Both languages must have a main method to execute. When calling functions in C they must be defined on above the main method or declared. Java has not such rules like that, order of the methods is not important. Both languages have enumerated types, but in Java these types are not mixed with integers, it can be thought as another class. Hereby, Java and C are syntactically similar languages.  
  
Java and C have some semantic differences. It is not possible to assign floating point number to an integer in Java unlike C. Primitive types can be dynamically allocated in C, but this is not possible in Java. When variables are wanted to be stored on heap in C, malloc or calloc functions are called, in Java this is done with the new keyword, but this allocation is not possible for primitive data types. In Java, there are wrapper classes like Integer, Double, Boolean etc... These are considered as Class, and they must be dynamically allocated with using new keyword for every type except primitive data types are classes in Java. It is possible to use and define pointers in C with using “*” operator. In Java, pointers are defined internally as references. All instances of classes are references in Java. In C not every type has to be dynamically allocated or defined with using pointer. Pointers are just an option in C. Also, C pointers are quite primitive according to Java’s reference. For example, when dynamic allocation is made in C, deallocation must be done by programmer, but however Java’s Garbage Collector does this automatically. When passing a variable through method in Java, it is automatically passes it by value for every type. It is same in C. In C it is an option to pass by reference (which is different than C++’s pass by reference) through pointers, this is not possible in Java. In Java, if programmer wants to make changes on the object through methods, it must be done through that object’s method. This difference exists, because of the programming paradigms. Generally, instances are members of classes, and changes of these instances are made inside that classes’ methods. Nonetheless in procedural approach, changes of variables are made through functions if variables are not global. Also, function overloading is not defined in C. Usage of control statements have differences for Java and C. They both have if, switch-case, for, while, do-while, break, continue. 
     
Both have dangling else problem. Java has for-each unlike C. Java is OOP language, therefore most of the process is done through objects, and it is also indicated that all Java classes are references. So that leads some comparison problems with using “==” operator in Java. In C there isn’t any concept as reference or class, consequently equality operator makes sense. Because in C, comparison always made between primitive types unlike Java. When some computer scientist came with a solution on purpose of making C object-oriented language, they created C++. In C++ their solution is called as operator overloading. C and Java does not support operator overloading. This is not a problem for C since it is procedural language, and Java solves this problem with inheritance. All classes of Java are inherited from Object class, and this class has equals, and hashCode methods, when a Java class is created, they inherited automatically. Programmer must implement these methods if they want their classes to have comparison functionality. Loops proceed same in both languages, but Java has for-each loop which uses iterators for traversing. C does not have that support. Both languages have switch-case statements it looks like they work as same, but not. Since Java programmers mostly uses equals method, selection must be done according to that method. In C selection they are compared directly. In Java, that is not sensible according to the reasons said, therefore comparisons are made with equals method for Strings, and enumerated classes. Arrays are different in Java and C. It looks like similar, but internally they are very different. This difference can be seen with their usage, in C definition looks like that “int arr[10] = {…};] but in Java this is “int[] arr = new int[10];”. According to these definitions arrays are classes, because “[]” used after type, which is prohibited in C. When accessing element of an array they works similar, arr[0] means pointing first element on that array for both language. Java arrays cannot be defined without new keyword. C arrays could be defined statically, and dynamically. In earlier versions of C, declarations must be beginning of the code block. First declarations were made, then they are instantiated, and you cannot declare variables except beginning. In later versions of C, mixed declaration is not forbidden. In Java there is no such case. All uninitialized objects are null in Java.    
  
In a programming language readability is an important criteria of language evaluation. Overall simplicity is one of the sub-topics that affects this criterion. Having too many features, or multiplicity of features increases the language’s unreadability. Because of Java being object-oriented, and higher-level language, it has more features than C. For instance, Java has interfaces, inheritance, visibility modifiers, classes (different from struct), exceptions, generics, annotations, etc. These variations cause to learn all these additional features in Java. Also, abstraction is much higher than C, for example C Java references. This special pointer makes deallocation itself with Garbage Collector which must be done by hand in C. It can cause to longer understanding process of how a program is working. Feature multiplicity in C and Java is similar for simpler codes because Java has C based syntax. “static” keyword is used with more than one purpose in Java. Classes, variables, methods can be static in Java, nevertheless it can be only used for variables in C. C codes are written with usage of less features than Java, but it can be much more complicated code because of this simplicity. More features can prevent unnecessary functions, statements, checks, and it can cause more focused code to the main task. This relationship is like C-Assembly relationship. Also, number of keywords is important metric for simplicity. Java has more keywords than C. Having more keyword leads that language less simple. Java is more orthogonal than C. It is not possible to return arrays from functions in C, but in Java functions can return anything since arrays are classes as said before. For both languages, void types cannot be used for variables. In C it is not possible to add pointers with each other, this is also not orthogonal. If variables passed directly to the functions, they are passed by value, but arrays are not passed by value. In Java everything is passed by value. Therefore, Java is more orthogonal language than C. Both languages are syntactically similar, but in C some operators have different meanings for different usage, for instance pointer symbol. It can be multiplication or pointer. When it is wanted to access a member of a struct, if it is done through pointer, it must be used “->” symbol, but otherwise it must be “.” symbol. Java uses only dot symbol for that purpose. So, C is simpler, but Java is more orthogonal, and has less syntax confusions.    
  
Writability shows parallelism with readability. Since C is simpler than Java, it can be said that writing code in C requires less features. For Java being more orthogonal than C makes things easier, because when programmer uses tools of that language, awareness is less required for the unexpected side effects in Java rather than C. Java’s for-each loop is more expressive than regular loops in both languages. Also, Java has a lot of additional abstractions because of the paradigm but comparing these not sensible in the sense of writability because C is not designed for that paradigm. As a result, it cannot be said easily that one of the languages is more writable than other, by reason of they are used for different purposes. If programmer needs language for embedded, or systems programming C must be the choice between them, but they want to develop mobile or web application, Java becomes more writable.    
  
Reliability is one of the language evaluation criteria. Java is much more reliable language than C because of many reasons. Beginner programmers in C, easily make type checking mistakes, and compiler does not detect most of them. This situation can cause logical errors, and debugging might become very difficult. Java makes type checking for every variable, instances in compile time. Most of the run-time error is prevented with this way. Another reason for Java being more reliable than C is, exception handling. C is one of the languages that does not have exception handling. It is an important structure to prevent or detect errors. Because of exception handling, programmer can easily debug. It makes possible to write algorithms which are separated from error handlings. This ability of programming language lets programmers to write reliable codes. Aliasing decreases reliability. C and Java have aliasing, but since it is possible to cast pointers in C, it might cause problems that compiler cannot detect. Java makes checking for aliasing at run-time, C has less restriction on aliasing. It can be easily said that C is less reliable than Java.    
  
If C and Java compared in terms of cost, although both language’s programmers aim different types of software, Java has advantage. In this writing, readability, and writability is already talked about, and both languages have superiority for different metrics, but when cost of development is the case, reusable code is important. Furthermore, object-oriented programming aims to write reusable codes. Therefore, Java is naturally having more advantage on this side than C. Because, Java is more reliable and secure, this also reduces the cost for Java, because if system has critical fails, it can cost too much. Most important thing in this comparison is portability. Java is much more portable than C, because of the JVM. It is explained above, and this reduces developing cost significantly. C programs are not portable as Java. Learning curve, training programmers is another consideration. In terms of writability, and readability, both have pros, and cons on that side. But Java have important libraries, and frameworks for development, this causes to extra learning. C does not have that much of learning procedure. Nonetheless, Java has wider community than C. Communities significantly affect the learning process, and availability. C programs generally work faster because it is simpler and closer to the machine language. Language gives programmers more capability, and with this it is possible to write efficient code in C. Java codes do not executes as fast as C programs, because of its features, abstractions, JVM, etc...    
Efficiency, and performance are more important on the C side, and faster executions, compilations reduce the cost.    
  
In conclusion, both languages have pros and cons on different parameters, and they both have different programming purposes. Most of these differences caused by their paradigms, and abstraction levels. It cannot be said that one of them is perfect for every case, both languages are tools for different kind of problems, purposes.    
